RNA_SEQ APP readme.
Summary of the Main Functions of this App
This app can take your count matrix and phenotype and perform two tasks when you click on the respective buttons. 
The first task that  the app can perform is differential expression and feature selection. Differential expression  is performed using Limma-Voom. The top 200 hits are then subjected to feature selection, which  is performed using a random forest classifier. 20 genes that are deemed to be most important in terms of  how great of an impact randomizing/permutating their counts values has on the performance of the classifier  are output on the page. The resulting table contains the Ensembl IDs, hgnc symbols, p-values, respective log fold changes , and if applicable/known full names of the  related protein products of those top 20 genes. The table can  be exported as a csv file. 
The second task that this app can perform is to prepare a PCA plot of your data in which the points are colored with regard to the phenotype of interest (blue dots have the phenotype, black dots do not have the phenotype). 
Prerequisites
1.You need to have prepared  a counts matrix  from your raw sequencing reads. This counts matrix must be  in a file that you can access on your device. 
2. You need to have an accessible  file containing your phenotype information. Be aware that the program can only look at one phenotype at a time with this app. However, after examining  your  data with regard to one phenotype you can re-examine your data with regard to another phenotype.
Mechanics/How to Use
1.On the left side of  the white section on the top of the page, you will see a file browse button with a label above it that says, “input counts.” Click on this button  to select the file containing your count matrix. The button will say “upload complete” under it when you have selected a file.
2.To the right of the previously mentioned button, there is another  file browse button with a label above that says, “input phenotype data.” Click on this button to select the file that contains your phenotype data. Just as with the previous button, the button will say “upload complete “ under it when you have selected a file.
3.Just below the white section of the page, you will see a button labeled “Perform differential expression analysis and Feature Selection on your RNA_SEQ  data.” Clicking on this button after you have input both your counts matrix and phenotype information  will initiate differential expression and feature selection using your counts matrix and phenotype data. After the process is completed, a table containing the Ensembl IDs, p-values, log fold change, hgnc symbol and protein name will appear on the page beneath the “Perform differential expression analysis and Feature Selection on your RNA_SEQ  data ” button.
4.Slightly below the “Perform differential expression analysis and Feature Selection on your RNA_SEQ  data” button or to the right of the table if you have already run the differential expression and feature selection, there is  a button labeled ”prepare and display a PCA plot of the data.” If you click this button after you have uploaded your  count matrix and phenotype data, a PCA plot  showing how samples are spread among the first and second principal components as determined  by PCA analysis will appear. To make the information more useful, the points  are colored based on the phenotype of interest. Blue dots have the phenotype and  black dots do not. The image can be copied and saved via right-clicking with your mouse. Note, if the differential expression and feature selection table  is already on the screen, the plot will appear below it. 
5.Finally, on the very bottom of the page, below the PCA plot, there is a button labeled “export as csv.” If you have already run the differential expression and feature selection,  clicking this button will allow you to save the table as a csv file which can be examined further in Excel. Warning! Do not click this button until the table has appeared on the screen.

